AI #1803: Contract Commitment dataset extension (#1924)
FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec: specification/datasets/contract_commitment/columns/contractcommitmentapplicability.md

Author: As a JSON structure, this column still very much needs to be rebuilt in order to clear TF review.  Need to meet with @mike-finopsorg to review further.

Author: @mike-finopsorg and I have synced, and we are collaborating on PR #1986 to work out a structure that can apply both to this new JSON column and then be applied backwards to all existing JSON columns.  Once we have finalized that structure, I will revise this definition to align with that format.

All of the content in this file is reviewable, however!  The only thing that will change is formatting and rewording, but the intention will be the same.

Author: I have now sketched out the refactor for this column in PR #1986.  Feedback is still welcome here.  I will determine with @mike-finopsorg whether I will port those changes back here once we have completed the work there, or if we will cut this content from this PR and move it over there for review/approval.

Author: Update: we are still working on this.  @mike-finopsorg has now issued a second option for implementing this via PR #2007, and I have issued some tweaks via PR #2008.

Author: This has been applied in this branch!  Resolving.

# Contract Commitment Applicability

> Contract Commitment Applicability is a structured definition of the specific entities eligible for coverage under a [*contract commitment*](#glossary:contract-commitment). This column details inclusionary and exclusionary logic, as well as the specific portion of cost or usage that is applicable.

Reviewer: see [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1924#discussion_r2895564574) for context

```suggestion
Contract Commitment Applicability is a structured definition of the specific entities eligible for coverage under a [*contract commitment*](#glossary:contract-commitment). This column details inclusionary and exclusionary logic, as well as the specific portion of the original incurred cost or usage that is eligible.
```

Author: ```suggestion
Contract Commitment Applicability is a structured definition of the specific entities eligible for coverage under a [*contract commitment*](#glossary:contract-commitment). This column details inclusionary and exclusionary logic, as well as the specific portion of eligible cost or usage that is applicable.
```

* ContractCommitmentApplicability MUST conform to [StringHandling](#attributes.stringhandling) requirements.
* ContractCommitmentApplicability MUST conform to [JsonObjectFormat](#attributes.jsonobjectformat) requirements.
* ContractCommitmentApplicability MUST conform to [ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject](#datasets.contractcommitment.contractcommitmentapplicability.contractcommitmentapplicabilityobject) requirements.
* ContractCommitmentApplicability MUST NOT be null.

## Contract Commitment Applicability Object

Contract Commitment Applicability consists of a valid JSON object which contains a set of top-level property keys. These keys define entity-based inclusionary and exclusionary logic, as well as the portion of relevant cost and/or usage that is applicable to the *contract commitment*.

The following section details the normative requirements for the ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject and its nested properties. For a logical overview of the expected content, see the [Schema Structure](#datasets.contractcommitment.contractcommitmentapplicability.schemastructure) and [Examples](#datasets.contractcommitment.contractcommitmentapplicability.examples) sections.

> ### Object Requirements

Reviewer 2: F.Y.I The current extraction model identifies the requirements, and I can build phases 1 and 2, but at this moment, I cannot generate the final JSON.

Author: Yes, you have mentioned this to me.  Any automated JSON generation for these kinds of columns will have to be manual until/unless you handle that, and I think that's fine.

The ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject MUST adhere to the following requirements:

> * ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject MUST conform to the [ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObjectSchema](#schemas.datasets.contractcommitment.contractcommitmentapplicabilityobjectschema) JSON Schema.

Reviewer: I didn’t generate the PDF locally; I downloaded it from Git, so I might be mistaken.

```suggestion
* ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject MUST conform to the [ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObjectSchema](#schemas.contractcommitment.contractcommitmentapplicabilityobjectschema) JSON Schema.
```

* ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.IsGlobalScope MUST be `true` if the *contract commitment* applies to all entities.
* ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.IsComplexScope MUST be `true` if the *contract commitment's* applicability logic exceeds schema capabilities.

> * ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Applicability.Cost MUST represent the fraction of the charge's cost eligible for the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).

Reviewer: Here we mention “…fraction of the charge's cost/usage eligible for the commitment…”, while in Discount Handling the following is specified:

> Service providers may have many types of discounts, including but not limited to commercially [negotiated discounts](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1924/files#glossary:negotiated-discount), [commitment discounts](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1924/files#glossary:commitment-discount) ...
> ...
> **Requirements**
> * All discounts applied to a row MUST apply to the entire charge.

It seems to me that there may be a conflict between allowing **fractional applicability** and the requirement that discounts apply to the entire charge.

Or am I misinterpreting this requirement?

> * ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Applicability.Cost MUST represent the fraction of the charge's cost eligible for the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).

Reviewer: @shawnalpay I know it’s really last-minute and far from appropriate to raise a concern right before approval, but unfortunately I missed it earlier.

Author: Perhaps.  We will have to discuss it further, and we will not be able to address this before the meeting in a few minutes.  I will downgrade this PR to `PR Member Review`.

Author: @ijurica 
Considering the requirement you have pointed out:

> * All discounts applied to a row MUST apply to the entire charge.

To me, "apply to the entire charge" does NOT equal, "100% of the cost/usage must be applicable".  

I think of it this way: a single row cannot be a mixture of discounted and non-discounted cost.  If a Contract Commitment said that 50% of usage is applicable, then it's 50% _of the entire charge_.  A contract commitment can apply to the entire charge _and_ be a percentage applicable.

For example: If a contract dictates that for any given use of a specific database service, only 50% of that cost is eligible for the commitment, the `Applicability.Cost` is 0.5. That 50% rule applies uniformly to the _entire_ charge on that row.

What this requirement actually prevents is temporal mixing. If you have 10 hours of database usage, but your commitment ran out after 5 hours, the provider cannot keep all 10 hours on one row and apply a discount to half of it. They MUST split it into two 5-hour rows so the discount applies uniformly to the "entire charge" of the specific row it sits on.

So, TL;DR: **in my opinion, nothing currently proposed in this PR needs revision.**

**That said**: if this is confusing for literally our highest-engaged working group member, then it's going to be confusing for others 😅 To clear this up for readers, what if we amended that requirement to read:

> * All discounts applied to a row MUST apply to the entire charge, regardless of the contract commitment's applicability percentage.

What do you think?

Reviewer: I'd say the use of the term **charge** in these ContractCommitmentApplicability requirements might be confusing:

### ContractCommitmentApplicability 

> * ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Applicability.Cost MUST represent the fraction of the charge's cost eligible for the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).
> * ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Applicability.Usage MUST represent the fraction of the charge's usage quantity eligible for the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).

In my previous comment, I missed one additional DiscountHandling rule. I’m now repeating the relevant rules here and also attaching the glossary definition for Charge.

### DiscountHandling Requirements

> * All discounts applied to a row MUST apply to the entire charge.
>   * Multiple discounts MAY apply to a row, but they MUST apply to the entire charge covered by that row.
>   * If a discount only applies to a portion of a charge, then the discounted portion of the charge MUST be split into a separate row.

### Glossary:

> **Charge**: A row in a FOCUS-compatible cost and usage dataset.

---

Applicability fraction applies to **the original, unsplit charge**, not to each charge (FOCUS row generated after splitting for discount handling).

So I suggest an alternative wording for the column definition, a couple of requirements, and the Cost and Usage descriptions:

- Replace the term “charge” with “original incurred cost/usage” to avoid confusion with FOCUS dataset rows.
- In column descriptions, replace “Percentage” with “Fraction” to reflect that values are expressed as 0.0–1.0 rather than 0–100%.
- Since this is contract metadata, I'd recommend consistently using ‘eligible’ rather than alternating with ‘applicable’

---

### Potential end result

> Contract Commitment Applicability ... details inclusionary and exclusionary logic, as well as the specific portion of the original incurred cost or usage that is eligible.
> ...
> * ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Applicability.Cost MUST represent the fraction of the original incurred cost eligible for the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).
> * ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Applicability.Usage MUST represent the fraction of the original incurred usage quantity eligible for the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).
> ...
> 
>  | Key | Type | Default | Description |
>  | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
>  | `Cost` | Decimal | 1.0 | Fraction of the original incurred usage quantity eligible for a spend-based *contract commitment* (`ContractCommitmentCategory` is "Spend"). |
>  | `Usage` | Decimal | 1.0 | Fraction of the original incurred cost eligible for a usage-based *contract commitment* (`ContractCommitmentCategory` is "Usage"). |

What do you think?

Author: @ijurica and I discussed this today.  She will bring examples to Mar 10 TF-1 for further discussion.

Author: @udam-stitcher @flanakin @rileyjenk   
@ijurica wanted me to check with you three on this thread, as some of the original authors of the Discount Handling attribute.

**We need your perspective on a potential conflict between the existing Discount Handling requirements and a new Contract Commitment Applicability requirement.**

Consider the following normative requirements in **Discount Handling**:

> * All discounts applied to a row MUST apply to the entire charge.
> * If a discount only applies to a portion of a charge, then the discounted portion of the charge MUST be split into a separate row.

Now, consider a proposed requirement in the new **Contract Commitment Applicability** column:

> * ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Applicability.Cost MUST represent the fraction of the charge’s cost eligible for the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).

Consider a contract where only 80% of the cost of a charge for a given Region is applicable to burning down a given contract commitment.

- **Irena sees a conflict here.**  Because only a portion of the charge is applicable, she feels it must be split into two rows (the part for 80%, and the remaining 20%), similar to how commitment discounts currently work under Discount Handling.
- **I see no conflict**, primarily because _applicability_ is distinct from a _discount_.  The entire charge is being considered to infer the fractional applicability, and no monetary discount is applied to a “portion of the charge”.  Furthermore, a charge can be fractionally applicable to _several contract commitments simultaneously_; therefore, splitting these rows is not possible (let alone preferred).  

That said, I agree that the wording in the new requirement could be finessed to avoid any confusion.  I propose:

> * ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Applicability.Cost MUST represent the fraction of a charge’s cost applicable to the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).

**Questions for you:**
1. Wording aside, do you see a conflict here? Do you believe the Discount Handling requirements, as currently written, apply to contract commitment applicability?
2. If yes, what changes would you propose we make?

One possibility discussed in TF-1 today is adding a constraint to the above Discount Handling requirements to strictly govern commitment discounts only.  However, Irena only wants to pursue that route if you all see it as necessary and/or preferred over taking no action.

Please let us know your thoughts.  This is the only major open thread on #1924, and we would like to target Member approval on Thu if possible.

Author: Propose:

```suggestion
* ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Applicability.Cost MUST represent the fraction of an eligible charge's cost that is applicable to the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).
```

Author: All other threads addressed per your approval.  @ijurica please lmk if we can resolve this thread.

Reviewer: yes, you can resolve it. as discussed, we'll address discount handling requirements in a separate PR.

> * ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Applicability.Cost MUST represent the fraction of the charge's cost eligible for the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).

Reviewer: see [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1924#discussion_r2895564574) for context

```suggestion
* ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Applicability.Cost MUST represent the fraction of the original incurred cost eligible for the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).
```

Author: ```suggestion
* ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Applicability.Cost MUST represent the fraction of an eligible charge's cost that is applicable to the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).
```

* ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Applicability.Usage MUST represent the fraction of the charge's usage quantity eligible for the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).
* ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Inclusions[\*].Applicability.Cost MUST represent the fraction of the charge's cost eligible for the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).

> * ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Inclusions[\*].Applicability.Usage MUST represent the fraction of the charge's usage quantity eligible for the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).

Reviewer: see [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1924#discussion_r2895564574) for context

```suggestion
* ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Applicability.Usage MUST represent the fraction of the original incurred usage quantity eligible for the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).
* ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Inclusions[\*].Applicability.Cost MUST represent the fraction the original incurred cost eligible for the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).
* ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Inclusions[\*].Applicability.Usage MUST represent the fraction of the original incurred usage quantity eligible for the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).
```

Author: * ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Applicability.Cost MUST represent the fraction of an eligible charge's cost that is applicable to the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).

```suggestion
* ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Applicability.Usage MUST represent the fraction of an eligible charge's usage that is applicable to the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).
* ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Inclusions[\*].Applicability.Cost MUST represent the fraction of an eligible charge's cost that is applicable to the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).
* ContractCommitmentApplicabilityObject.Inclusions[\*].Applicability.Usage MUST represent the fraction of an eligible charge's usage that is applicable to the commitment (0.0 to 1.0).
```

| `Inclusions` | Array | Conditional | Required only if `IsGlobalScope` and `IsComplexScope` are both `false` or null. List of `Rule` objects defining the boundary. Must be omitted if Global or Complex scope is true. |
| `ExclusionOperator` | String | No | Defines the relationship for `Exclusions`. Valid values: `And`, `Or`. Defaults to `Or`. |
| `Exclusions` | Array | No | List of `Rule` objects defining entities to be removed from the boundary. |

### Rule Object

| Key | Type | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `Dimension` | String | A valid FOCUS Column Name (e.g., `SkuId`, `RegionId`). |
| `Operator` | String | The comparison logic to apply. Must be one of the Supported Operators. |
| `Values` | Array | A list of strings to compare. A value of `["*"]` acts as a global wildcard. |
| `Applicability` | Object | Optional. The specific fraction of applicability for entities matching this rule. Overrides the top-level `Applicability`. |

### Applicability Object

| Key | Type | Default | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `Cost` | Decimal | 1.0 | Percentage applicable to `ContractCommitmentCost`. |

> | `Usage` | Decimal | 1.0 | Percentage applicable to `ContractCommitmentQuantity`. |

Reviewer: see [this thread](https://github.com/FinOps-Open-Cost-and-Usage-Spec/FOCUS_Spec/pull/1924#discussion_r2895564574) for context

```suggestion
| Key | Type | Default | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `Cost` | Decimal | 1.0 | Fraction of the original incurred cost eligible for a spend-based *contract commitment* (`ContractCommitmentCategory` = "Spend"). |
| `Usage` | Decimal | 1.0 | Fraction of the original incurred usage quantity eligible for a usage-based *contract commitment* (`ContractCommitmentCategory` = "Usage"). |
```

Author: ```suggestion
| Key | Type | Default | Description |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `Cost` | Decimal | 1.0 | Fraction of an eligible charge's cost applicable to the *contract commitment*. |
| `Usage` | Decimal | 1.0 | Fraction of an eligible charge's usage applicable to the *contract commitment*. |
```

| :--- | :--- | :--- |
| `"*"` | Represents all possible values for the specified Dimension. | `In`, `Contains`, `Exists`, `DoesNotExist` |

### Wildcard Behavior Rules

1. **Inclusion Logic:** When `["*"]` is used in an Inclusion rule, the rule evaluates to `True` for every entity, effectively making the commitment "Organization-wide" for that specific Dimension.
2. **Exclusion Logic:** When `["*"]` is used in an Exclusion rule, the rule evaluates to `True` for every entity, effectively excluding all entities (this is typically used only in combination with `ExclusionOperator: "And"` for surgical filtering).
3. **Implicit Wildcards:** If a Dimension (e.g., `RegionId`) is omitted entirely from the `Inclusions` array, it is treated as an implicit wildcard (unrestricted).

## Object Example

Here is a basic example of the object format, describing organization-wide coverage **except** for Database services running in BillingAccountId 123456789012.  

* For more detailed examples, please see this column's entry in the JSON Object Examples appendix entry [here](#appendix.examples:jsonobject.examples:contractcommitmentapplicability).

> * For the JSON schema, please see [Contract Commitment Applicability Object Schema](#schemas.datasets.contractcommitment.contractcommitmentapplicabilityobjectschema).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* For the JSON schema, please see [Contract Commitment Applicability Object Schema](#schemas.contractcommitment.contractcommitmentapplicabilityobjectschema).
```

```json
{
  "IsGlobalScope": true,
  "ExclusionOperator": "And",
  "Exclusions": [
    {
      "Dimension": "BillingAccountId",
      "Operator": "In",
      "Values": ["123456789012"]
    },
    {
      "Dimension": "ServiceCategory",
      "Operator": "In",
      "Values": ["Database"]
    }
  ]
}
```

> ## Implementation Guidance

Reviewer 2: This section has some BCP-14 requirements. Is it intended to be normative? Are we planning to incorporate it into the Requirements Model? If yes, each statement should be reviewed and included in its own Requirements section.

Author: I've addressed this!  Thank you @jpradocueva.

### Processing Workflow

The evaluation of an entity against a commitment applicability MUST follow a strict linear progression:

1. **Normalization:** Convert the entity attribute and the Scope `Values` to a consistent case (default: lowercase) for comparison.
2. **Inclusion Evaluation:** Iterate through `Inclusions`. If a match is found, record the rule-level `Applicability` if present. Apply `InclusionOperator`. If result is `False`, terminate.
3. **Exclusion Evaluation:** Iterate through `Exclusions`. If `True`, terminate evaluation.
4. **Applicability Resolution:**
   * **Inheritance:** A matching rule's `Applicability` object takes precedence over the top-level object.
   * **Defaulting:** If a metric key (`Cost` or `Usage`) is missing within a provided `Applicability` object, the engine MUST default that specific value to `1.0`.
   * **Rule-level Priority:** Use the `Applicability` from the matching inclusion rule. If multiple rules match under `Or`, the engine MUST use the highest percentage for each respective metric.

>    * **Fallback:** Use the top-level `Applicability` if no rule-level value is provided.

Author: Eliminate all caps MUSTs in this non-normative area:

```suggestion
The evaluation of an entity against a commitment applicability must follow a strict linear progression:

1. **Normalization:** Convert the entity attribute and the Scope `Values` to a consistent case (default: lowercase) for comparison.
2. **Inclusion Evaluation:** Iterate through `Inclusions`. If a match is found, record the rule-level `Applicability` if present. Apply `InclusionOperator`. If result is `False`, terminate.
3. **Exclusion Evaluation:** Iterate through `Exclusions`. If `True`, terminate evaluation.
4. **Applicability Resolution:**
   * **Inheritance:** A matching rule's `Applicability` object takes precedence over the top-level object.
   * **Defaulting:** If a metric key (`Cost` or `Usage`) is missing within a provided `Applicability` object, the engine must default that specific value to `1.0`.
   * **Rule-level Priority:** Use the `Applicability` from the matching inclusion rule. If multiple rules match under `Or`, the engine must use the highest percentage for each respective metric.
   * **Fallback:** Use the top-level `Applicability` if no rule-level value is provided.
```

### Integration with Commitment Logic

The evaluation of **Applicability** percentages must be contextually aligned with the [Contract Commitment Model](#datasets.contractcommitment.contractcommitmentmodel) and [Contract Commitment Fulfillment Interval](#datasets.contractcommitment.contractcommitmentfulfillmentinterval):

* **Continuous Models:** Applicability percentages MUST be applied to each discrete unit of activity (e.g., every hour) within the **Fulfillment Interval**. If the commitment is not fully utilized by eligible entities within that hour, the remaining capacity expires.
* **Discontinuous Models:** Applicability percentages determine the portion of aggregate activity that counts toward fulfillment over the entire **Interval** (e.g., a full year).

### Dependency Logic

> 1. **Consistency:** Engines SHOULD expect a JSON Object and SHOULD NOT support scalar (Decimal/Float) values for this field to ensure compatibility with typed database schemas.

Reviewer 2: I don't think this normative statement should be added to the model. At least at the moment, I am unclear how to add it. Also, it has multiple normative requirements on the same sentence.

Author: Sorry for the inclusion of normative requirements outside of the requirements section. This, and all these requirements, are being now handled via the Object Schema requirement.

I have stepped this down to just "should" and "should not" instead of "SHOULD" and "SHOULD NOT".

> 2. **Conflict Resolution:** If `IsGlobalScope` or `IsComplexScope` is `true`, the `Inclusions` array MUST be empty or omitted. Additionally, `IsGlobalScope` and `IsComplexScope` MUST NOT both be `true` at the same time. Engines should validate these structural constraints before processing.

Reviewer 2: @mike-finopsorg, @shawnalpay, this is not a stopper for approving the PR, but I am unclear how to incorporate these mandatory requirements (MUST) into the model.

Author: Sorry for the inclusion of normative requirements outside of the requirements section.  This, and all these requirements, are being now handled via the Object Schema requirement.  

I have stepped this down to just "must not" instead of "MUST NOT".
